+++
date = '2025-02-06T12:12:10Z'
draft = false
title = 'About'
disableToc = false
+++

Hello, my name is Aaron; I am a student at the University of
Warwick. I study a combination of computer science, biomedical and
systems engineering, and molecular and systems biology.

My main interests lie in [synthetic/engineering
biology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synthetic_biology), in the
application of computational and engineering methods to biomedical and
clinical sciences.

Engineering biology is a field I have been passionate about since very
early on in my life—I was first exposed to genetic engineering in year
8 (2018), with the release of Justin Atkin's presentation of his [DIY
lactose intolerance gene
therapy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J3FcbFqSoQY), and subsequent
[spider silk-producing
yeast](https://youtu.be/Fx8TcGrCOSI?feature=shared). This encouraged
me to engage in various DIY biologist and engineering communities, and
inspired both my A-level choices (Biology, Chemistry, CompSci, Maths)
and choice of degree.

I actively engage in interdisciplinary research projects, having
[participated](/posts/igem) in iGEM 2024 as a computational biologist
to engineer a bacterial system for lanthanide transport, as well as
smaller projects such as applying machine learning to butterfly wing
image segmentation and analysis.

I am currently working on a group research project for the use of
genomic sequencing data in optimal control of immunotherapy.

## Skills
For software engineering, I am proficient in a variety of general purpose
programming languages, including C, Java, Julia, MATLAB, Scheme/Lisp,
and Python. I develop mainly on Linux, and have extensive experience
in Unix-like system/server maintenance and administration. I am
familiar with modern methodologies such as AGILE and scrum.

Of these, I have used Julia, MATLAB, and Java for mathematical and
computational systems modelling for biological systems, involving a
range of methodologies including ODE-based modelling and agent-based
modelling.

Closer to the hardware, I am proficient in Verilog for FPGA
programmable logic design. For electronics/robotics, I have
used Raspberry Pi SBCs and Arduinos in a number of personal
projects—such as 3D-printed animatronic puppets and automatons—and
often hack together electronic systems for the odd problem life throws
in my way. In my first year of university for example, I constructed a
door-activated alarm system to stop myself from leaving my key inside
my room. I was promptly made to take it down due to its resemblance to
a bomb.

I also have some small experience in the wet lab, having skills in
pipetting, PCR, gel electrophoresis, plasmid preparation, and other
such basic microbiology techniques.

## Awards
**Gold medal—iGEM**:  I was a member of the 2024 Warwick iGEM team
[BEACON](https://2024.igem.wiki/warwick), where we engineered bacteria
to transport rare earth metals through a solution for recycling. Our
project included a range of dry lab, wet lab, and human practices
work, for which we were awarded a [gold
medal](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/dcs/news/?newsItem=8ac672c492d39b5d0192e6ffcbc10b44)
at the 2024 Paris Jamboree. I wrote up my experiences of the project
[here](/posts/igem).

**Senior Award for Computer Science—Gravesend Grammar School**: 
During my time in Sixth Form, I was awarded the Kuldeep Singh Cheema
trophy for Computer Science. In part, this was due to having achieved
a perfect score in my final year software engineering project—the
first to have ever been achieved in the school, and general academic
achievement, for which I was also awarded the Peter Jones prize.

## Hobbies
In my spare time I enjoy reading, hiking, baking, tennis, badminton,
art, and chess.

## Contact
Email: `Aaron {at} aaronklee.com` \
Signal: `@Aaron.255`
